# How to Internationalize and Localize Your REST API

What is internationalization (i18n) and localization (l10n)?
I18n is the process of making the text in your application capable of delivering in multiple languages.
l10n means that your application has been coded in a way that it meets the language or cultural requirements of a particular locale such as time and date formats, timezones, symbols, currency, or icons.

So, why are they important? Because you want your API service to be as accessible as possible so you can reach maximum users.
Java apps are relatively straightforward to internationalize, thanks to built-in mechanisms. Same goes for Spring Boot applications and REST API services.

Not every part of the application needs to be localized but it makes sense to have ready for it and externalize the text to be outside of the code.
The externalization is a good practice anyway and it makes it simpler for review by non-programmers.

There are several approaches to the internationalization:

1. Internationalization at the UI layer only:
    - This is typical option when only the users of the UI require localization and the users of the REST API are developers who are fine with the US English localization.
    - The REST API is not localized but it provide output in form of keys or identifiers that are using by the UI and localized there. For example, the REST API response contains: `"error.message.key"` instead `"Localized error message text"`. The UI has defined localizations that contain localized text for `"error.message.key"`.
    - This is the most easy option for the REST API since there is internalization on its side expect for designing the API to return keys instead of text.

2. Internationalization of the REST API responses:
    - The responses of the REST API contains localized text based on the locale that the client has requested (usually using the `Accept-Language` HTTP header).
    - The REST API needs to have the texts externalized and load the correct locale based on the client request. Usually, there is a fallback to a default locale (usually `en-US`).

3. Internationalization of the REST server log messages:
    - The system programmer can choose what is the localization of the server log messages.
    - This is not typical. But it makes sense for the numbered and documented messages when the system programmers require other language than US English.
    - Full localization of all server log messages in more fine grained level is not usually possible because such messages may originate in third-party libraries that do support internationalization.

4. Internationalization of API documentation in Swagger JSON format:
    - This is not typical for many REST APIs but it can make sense for business application APIs.
    - Externalizing API documentation string from the Java code to a property file is a good practice.

You should decide what kind of internationalization you need based on the needs of your users. Even if you do not provide localizations, it makes sense to externalize the strings that are displayed to the users.

## Designing API Responses for Localization in UI

An example of a response data that support localization is the standardized message format that is described at [Error Handling](error-handling.md).
The `messageContent` contains US English text for the API client that do not support i18n. The client that support it will use the `messageKey`
to lookup the localized message text and will use the `messageParameters` and message formating in the UI to get the final message text.

```json
{
    "messages": [
        {
            "messageType": "INFO",
            "messageKey": "sample.message.key",
            "messageContent": "Text in US English. First parameter is ABC, second is 123.",
            "messageParameters": [
                "ABC", 123
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

You can use similar approach to support i18n in your responses.

## Internationalization of the REST API Responses

The sample and the SDK uses standard Java and Spring i18n support: `Locale`, `ResourceBundle`, and `MessageSource`. These classes are explained well in [i18n in Java 11, Spring Boot, and JavaScript](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2019/02/25/java-i18n-internationalization-localization).

The SDK provide does the necessary setup so you just need to define the message text in `messages*.properties` files and load them using `MessageSource`.

To define and use a new externalized string you need to:

1. Define in `messages.properties` in the directory `src/main/resources/messages.properties` in US English:

    ```properties
    GreetingController.greeting=Hello
    ```

    **Note:** It is a just common practice to use the class name (for example: `GreetingController`) that is using the message to prevent conflicts. You may have a better conventions for your application.

2. Provide localized values in all locales that you want to support - e.g. to `messages_es.yml` in Spanish:

    ```properties
    GreetingController.greeting=Hola
    ```

3. Make your bean to be able to use localized messages by implementing `MessageSourceAware` interface:

    ```java
    @Bean
    public class MyClass implements MessageSourceAware {
        private MessageSource messageSource;

        public void setMessageSource(MessageSource messageSource) {
            this.messageSource = messageSource;
        }

        ...
    ```

4. Get the locale:

   a) From the REST request by calling `LocaleContextHolder.getLocale()`
   b) From the REST request by defining `@ApiIgnore Locale locale` as an argument of the controller method
   c) Use the default server locale by calling `Locale.getDefault()` which is by default `en-US`

5. Use it:

    ```java
    messageSource.getMessage("GreetingController.greeting", null, locale);
    ```

See [MessageSource](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/context/MessageSource.html) documentation and [Internationalization using MessageSource](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/spring-framework-reference/core.html#context-functionality-messagesource) for more details.

## Localizing the Standardized Error Messages

The `ApplicationConfig` class initializes the `errorService` bean.

```java
    private final ErrorService errorService = ErrorServiceImpl.getDefault();

    @Bean
    public ErrorService errorService() {
        return errorService;
    }
```

The `ErrorServiceImpl.getDefault()` creates an error service that load the SDK commons messages and your service messages from YAML files and their localizations from properties files. For your service `messages.yml` and `messages*.properties` are used.

If you want to localize a text of a message defined in `messages.yml` you have to add the localized texts to the `messages*.properties`.

For example, if you have a message defined in `messages.yaml` like:

```yaml
messages:
    - key: org.zowe.sample.apiservice.greeting.empty
      number: ZWEASA001
      type: ERROR
      text: "The provided name is empty. Provide a name that is not empty."
```

You define the Czech localization in `messages_cs.properties`:

```properties
messages.org.zowe.sample.apiservice.greeting.empty.text=Zadané jméno je prázdné. Zadejte jméno, které není prázdné.
```

Use the `messages.{messageKey}.text` to define the message text for `{messageKey}`. You can use also the `.reason` and `.action` suffixes.

## Requesting a Specific Locale from API Client

The specific language or locale can be requested by `Accept-Language` HTTP header.

The values depends on the locales that are supported by your service, for example:

- `en` - English
- `en-US` - English Enlish and US country
- `cs` - Czech
- `cs-CZ` - Czech and Czechia

The fallback is to the message in the same language if there is not a message for specific country and to the default in unlabeled `messages.properties` or `messages.yaml` which are expected to be in `en-US`.

You can find more codes at [HTML Language Code](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_language_codes.asp) and [HTML Country Codes](https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_country_codes.asp).

Browsers usually set the language based on their setting or the settings of the operating system.

**Example of HTTP request:**

`http -a zowe:zowe --verify=False GET "https://localhost:10080/api/v1/greeting?name=Petře" Accept-Language:cs-CZ`

```http
HTTP/1.1 200

{
    "content": "Ahoj, Petře!",
    "id": 2,
    "languageTag": "cs-CZ"
}
```

You can also use the query parameter `lang`. For example: `https://localhost:10080/api/v1/greeting?name=Petře&lang=cs`.

The default behavior of the SDK and Spring is to use a cookie in this case to preserve the locale in the browser.

```http
HTTP/1.1 200
Set-Cookie: org.springframework.web.servlet.i18n.CookieLocaleResolver.LOCALE=cs; Path=/

{
    "content": "Ahoj, Petře!",
    "id": 3,
    "languageTag": "cs"
}
```

## Setting the Default Server Locale

The default locale is `en-US` which stands for US English.
The Java allows to change it using Java System properties:
`-Duser.language=en -Duser.country=US`.

The template JCL has these options in there:

```sh
IJO="$IJO -Duser.language=en -Duser.country=US"
```

### Example for Czech

This needs to be changed in the JCL thats start the service to get proper output in STDOUT:

```sh
IJO="$IJO -Duser.language=cs -Duser.country=CZ"

export JZOS_OUTPUT_ENCODING="IBM-870"
```

`JZOS_OUTPUT_ENCODING` causes JZOS batch launcher to convert the Unicode output from Java to IBM-870 when it is being written to a single-byte encoding in STDOUT DD. [IBM-870](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EBCDIC_870) is the EBCDIC Latin-2 charset used in Czechia and other countries in Central Europe.

Your terminal emulator needs to be set up to display IBM-870 correctly.
